[Music]
part one the small beginnings 1776
through 1914
warfare in Europe during the age of new
world discoveries was a captive of
formalism an extreme of etiquette and
familiarity with the foe tempered by a
static condition with regard to weapons
technology on the continent the
situation probably was radically altered
by the increased use of gunpowder and
the horse in the Americas it was
challenged by a competing strategy
familiarity with and utilization of
natural surroundings in defeating the
enemy
this was the technique of the Indian
devoid of military identification
symbols adept in tracking and skillful
observation without detection and given
to making attacks by surprise from the
Vantage of protective cover the natives
of the Americas constituted a unique and
mysterious combatant to those daring to
venture into the new land quote
colonists struggling to found permanent
settlements along the Atlantic seaboard
passed the vast ocean and a sea of
troubles before as William Bradford put
it encountered in the Indian what to
them was a new kind of foe a foe with a
remarkable technique of patience
subterfuge and cunning device evolved in
surroundings quite different from those
of the old world by virtue of his
training in the Indian mode of war every
brave was also in effect a spy through
inborn capacity for the finesse of
prowling and scouting he was in his own
environment so skillful as to make white
men seem comparative bunglers so
declared Colonel Richard I dodge riding
in 1882 while still there was a frontier
regarding the Warriors of the Western
Plains and mountains so said the young
Washington who through frontier service
became versed in the ways of eastern
Redskins
end quote George s Bryan the spy in
America Philadelphia JB Lippincott
Company 1943 page 15
by the time colonial rivalries began to
flare in the new world an awareness and
appreciation of Indian allies both as
warriors and as sources of intelligence
information was fairly well established
in the area of the st. Lawrence River
Valley the French quickly established
1609 through 1627 trade relations and
missionary ties with the fierce Iroquois
tribes of the region occasional
reversals were experienced in the course
of these diplomatic efforts with the
Indians the most devastating occurring
when the Iroquois supplied with arms by
the Dutch began a decade 1642 through
1653 of intermittent attacks upon the
Hurons
with whom the French also had trade and
political alliances while a treaty ended
these hostilities eventually the
Iroquois allied themselves with the
British open conflict between the French
and the Iroquois erupted in 1684
reaching as far west as the Mississippi
and embroiling the territory surrounding
Lakes Erie and Ontario an ineffectual
campaign by the French in 1687 prompted
the Iroquois to retaliate the following
year and bloody raids throughout the st.
Lawrence Valley in August of 1689 the
Iroquois slaughtered two hundred
inhabitants of Lachine now a suburb of
Montreal in Ontario province and took
another 90 as prisoners on the eve of
the intercolonial Wars King William's
war 1689 through 1697 Queen Anne's war
1702 through 1713 King George's War 1740
through 1748 French and Indian War or
Seven Years War 1754 through 1763
the French counted Indian alliances
extended from the Abenaki and Maine to
the Algonquin and Wisconsin and north
toward Hudson Bay and a number of Cory
ARS Dubois familiar with forests and
trails in the area of conflict among
their intelligence resources the English
were assisted by the powerful Iroquois
Alliance that the French were
resourceful in their use of Indian spies
and Scouts is evidenced by the
circumstances surrounding the disastrous
expedition to fort de Quezon II led by
General Edward Braddock in 1755 himself
disdainful of Indians and their services
as Scouts Braddock and his forces were
surprised by a smaller but better
positioned French unit a few miles away
from Disney the battle was one of
confusion and terror within the British
ranks a great number of officers were
killed
adding to the disorder among the troops
Braddock died three days after the
battle from wounds he received in the
fray and to what made the success of the
French for this action be attributed
quote from the life and travels of
Colonel James Smith we know what the
French had been doing Smith then a
youthful Pennsylvania frontiersman while
at work on a military road from Fort
Loudoun westward was captured by Indian
allies of the French and taken to Fort
de qez knee there he fell to talking
with a Delaware who had a smattering of
English I asked him Smith wrote what
news from Braddock's army he said the
Indians spied them every day and he
showed me by making marks on the ground
with a stick that Braddock's army was
advancing in very close order and that
the Indians would surround them take
trees and as he expressed it shoot him
down all one pigeon end quote of course
not everyone within the British military
forces was adverse to the utilization of
Indians and their cause in a routine
communicate to Colonel Henry bukhet
dated July 16th 17:58
George Washington acknowledged the
dispatch of certain Indian bands with
the observation that quote I must
confess that I think these scalping
parties of Indians we send out will more
effectually harass the enemy by keeping
them under continual alarms than any
parties of white people can do because
small parties of ours are not equal to
the undertaking not being so dexterous
skulking as Indians and large ones will
be discovered by their spies early
enough to give the enemy time to repel
them by a superior force and at all
events there is a greater probability of
losing many of our best men and
fatiguing others before the most
essential services are entered upon and
I'm afraid not answer the proposed end
end quote the influence of the Indian
upon intelligence activity is undeniable
affecting both information gathering and
interpretation techniques as well as
troop deployment practices which were
accordingly modified to confuse
intelligence operatives the intelligence
skills of the Indians were continued and
refined by the frontier Scouts who
guided wagon trains and cavalry across
the plains with the westward migration
it may be argued that by the time of the
Jessie Scouts a name applied to federal
Scouts masquerading in Confederate
uniforms and their southern counterparts
the Indian tradition of field
intelligence surprise attack and
sabotage had penetrated the federal
armed services and in one form or
another has remained operative within
that institution through guerrilla units
Marauder groups Rangers and Special
Forces one revolution and intelligence
with the advent of a revolutionary war
against the British the American
colonists demonstrated a willingness to
utilize certain intelligence techniques
familiar with the intrigues of the
continent as repressive trade and
economic measures began to Kindle
opposition to the Kings policies in the
new world various secret societies were
formed aiding the cause of Liberty with
both intelligence and mischievous deeds
the most famous of these clandestine
organizations the Sons of Liberty was
formed in the summer of 1765 to oppose
the Stamp Act active through the
provincial towns and settlements they
constituted an underground information
network
and resorted to violent actions in their
protestations the sons were thought to
be responsible for example for the
burning of the records of the Vice
Admiralty court in Boston and the
ransacking of the home of the
Comptroller of the currency there in
August these and lesser feats were of
sufficient impact that before the
effective date November 1st 1765 of the
Stamp Act all of the Royal Stamp agents
in the colonies had resigned by the time
of the signing of the Declaration of
Independence a variety of partisans
revolutionaries and loyalists were
providing intelligence for the cause
also at this early date perhaps as
consequence of prior exposure to spy
activities during the inter colonial
hostilities or even as a result of some
familiarity with the prevailing
espionage situation initial policies
regarding defense information security
appeared Articles of War adopted in 1775
forbid any unauthorized correspondence
with the enemy on the part of the
Continental Armed Forces the following
year the Continental Congress enacted an
ordinance against spying by civilians in
time of war executions for spying or
public affairs designed to further
reinforce the legal prohibitions
established by the revolutionaries and
in international law nevertheless
the crown recruited and maintained an
effective and highly important espionage
organization in the colonies quote had
it not been for the clandestine service
rendered by loyalists the British would
hardly have been able to prolong the
struggle for eight years the revolution
has in that sense to be viewed as a
domestic war and far greater measure
than had been perceived until the 20th
century when research through convincing
light on the subject
as agents provocateurs whose function
was that of all-round troublemaking
as informers and sly correspondence as
dispatch bearers as military spies
civilian intelligence agents and
go-betweens the Tories labored and dared
for the side to which in the majority of
instances they were honestly attached
upon whose victory they confidently
reckoned and which had dangled before
them the encouragement of final reward
to British commanders in America this
aid was indispensable end quote it is
not certain as to when the Continental
Armed Forces began utilizing the
services of undercover operatives but
with the leadership of George Washington
they had a strategist well aware of ways
to foil and enhance the intelligence
function quote no other commander of his
time knew better than did Washington the
necessity of being constantly informed
about the enemy if there were a surprise
he chose to spring it as he did at
Trenton not to be the victim of it he
employed light horse mounted and
dismounted for reconnaissance
he had harassing parties to annoy the
enemy and more important to return with
prisoners from whom valuable
intelligence might be obtained he
ordered that the North Shore of Long
Island especially the bays be constantly
watched from high ground on the opposite
shore by lookouts with good spy glasses
who could note unusual movements of
enemy shipping end quote
one of Washington's first actions after
taking command of the army in July 1775
at Cambridge was to dispatch an agent to
Boston to establish a secret
correspondence network to report on
enemy movements and activities he
preferred intelligence in writing and to
safeguard such communicate a variety of
codes and an invisible ink were utilized
at different times
the British had no personnel schooled in
decoding and reasonably complex ciphers
withstood various efforts of translation
Washington also established fixed terms
of service for secret agents and
specific matters of importance upon
which he sought for sighs details quote
among major topics of intelligence
Washington listed arrivals troop
movements signs of expeditions by land
or water shifts of position localities
of posts and how fortified strength and
distribution of core and the state of
Garrison's in addition to such things
there were all kinds of minor
particulars whose interest and value
would he felt be obvious to a competent
agent end quote Washington made regular
but guarded use of spies his caution was
prompted by the precarious division of
allegiance which transversed
familial religious and regional ties and
a variety of lesser human loyalties
still he knew the value of clandestine
operatives quote on the basis of results
he said after some four years of war the
greatest benefits are to be derived from
persons who live with the other side it
is with such I have endeavored to
establish a correspondence and on their
reports I shall most rely these people
had a chance to examine freely without
attracting suspicion and they could
report more literally not only on
factual details but also on the enemy's
morale end quote the most sophisticated
and enduring spy system in good running
order for five years maintained by
Washington was led by major Benjamin
Tallmadge and operated in the
environment and Long Island a
commissioned officer in the second light
dragoons of Connecticut also known as
Sheldon's dragoons and the Yale
classmate and closest personal friend of
the martyred Nathan Hale Tallmadge
recruited his agents from among his
friends quote the organization consisted
of Tallmadge Robert Townsend
Abraham Woodhull
Austin Roe and Caleb Brewster all young
men of imagination daring and social
position their operations were conducted
by a method that was both devious and
secure Townsend lived in New York where
he ran a general store which attracted
British customers who were greatly
pumped for information Rowe was an
active Horseman who liked to ride from
the heart of New York over Long Island
country roads in all kinds of weather he
carried the reports to Woodhull
Woodhull then hurried to a point on the
North Shore of Long Island to look for a
black petticoat and handkerchiefs on a
clothesline if they were hanging it
signaled that the boatman Brewster who
sailed his boat from one side of Long
Island Sound to the other had landed in
a small Cove on Long Island Brewster
then took the coded messages across to
Connecticut to Tallmadge who transmitted
them to General Washington end quote
in this venture as in all of his spy
arrangements Washington had certain
particulars of information which were of
priority importance quote he was
Washington's request that he be
specifically informed as to the health
and spirits of the British Army and Navy
in the city the number of men allotted
to the defense of the city and its
environs the Corps to be specified and
where posted the guarding of transports
whether by armed vessels or with chains
booms etc the works crossing York Island
at the rear of the city the readouts and
the number of guns in each the works if
any between these and fortnight Austin
and Washington the works if any on the
Harlem River near Harlem town also on
the East River facing Hell Gate the
character of the defenses whether for
example they included Pitts in which
stakes had been fixed existing supplies
of forage provisions and wood movements
by land or water he also wished
intelligence regarding vessels and boats
on Long Island Sound
somebody in the vicinity of Brooklyn
could he thought under pretext of
marketing obtained daily admission to
the garrison there always he stressed
the importance of concrete details the
value of accuracy the worthlessness of
rumors end quote
the employment of spies and informers
was an expensive prospect which
Washington managed quite well
his first appeal for an intelligence
fund appears to have been made on August
25th 1978 quote Congress sent 500
guineas which would he said be used with
discretion as it might be required he
added that the American intelligence
service had been far from satisfactory
either because Swift decline and the
value of continental currency had
rendered the terms of service
extravagantly high or because in some
instances any offer whatever of paper
money had been refused when he accepted
his commission it was with the distinct
proviso that no salary would attach to
it
but that he would keep a record of his
expenses on July 1st 1783 he drew up in
his own handwriting a detailed statement
of these accounts from which we learned
that in eight years the total
expenditure for Secret Intelligence was
1982 pounds 10 shillings the Continental
Congress had authorized an amount not to
exceed 2,000 guineas in gold specie to
be drawn from the Treasury by Washington
for secret services here is sufficient
evidence of how frugally he must have
dealt out guineas in those pinching
times end quote
in terms of the development of
intelligence techniques the period of
the Revolutionary War witnessed two
innovations the introduction of special
devices in this case an invisible ink
and counterintelligence arrangements
quote this particular ink and its
reagent or counterpart the formulas for
which remain unknown were invented by
Sir James J John J's elder brother and
physician living in England
we're in 1763 he had been knighted Sir
James by the account he later gave
Thomas Jefferson believed from what he
had learned of certain curious
experiments that a fluid might possibly
be discovered for invisible writing
which would elude the generally known
means of detection and yet could be
rendered visible by a suitable
counterpart when war in America seemed
inevitable he saw that in forwarding
secret intelligence this method would
possess great advantages accordingly he
sent from England to his brother John in
New York considerable quantities of the
liquids he had hit upon endquote counter
espionage efforts appear to have begun
around July of 1776 and soon developed
into an effective organized effort
however it fell to the sub-national
jurisdictions to cultivate these actions
this course of initiative created
certain problems and confusion for
Washington's intelligence program
typical of these frustrations was a case
where New Jersey authorities had
mistakenly jailed three of Washington's
agents working in the New York City area
quote I hope wrote Washington to the
governor you will put a stop to the
prosecution unless other matters appear
against them
you must be welcome Vince it is
indispensably necessary to make use of
such means to procure intelligence the
persons employed must bear the suspicion
of being thought inimical and it is not
in their power to assert their innocence
because that would get abroad and
destroy the confidence which the enemy
puts in them he later mentioned to the
President of Congress the annoyance
occasioned through inter meddling with
state officials there had been instances
he said of prosecution in the civil
courts when it had been necessary for
headquarters to reveal the true
character of the accused men this has
served to deter others from acting in
the same capacity and to increase the
dread of detection in our confidential
friends
once in a while it happened that a man
who undertook to get intelligence under
the subterfuge of trade did seem to
devote more attention to his own profits
than he did to intelligence but it
wasn't best to be too severe with him
end quote
the most vigorous counterintelligence
program was in New York where in May of
1776 the provincial Congress established
a panel on intestine enemies which is
often referred to as the Committee on
conspiracies under the authority of this
body
johnjay future chief justice diplomat
and Federalist Papers author and
Nathaniel Sackett another leading figure
of the time directed as many as 10
agents and ferreting out British spies
and informers among these heroes was
Enoch Crosby who has generally thought
Cooper's protestations to the contrary
to have been the model for james
fenimore cooper's character harvey birch
and the spy published in 1821 this
network was superseded by a more
ambitious unit the commissioners for
detecting and defeating conspiracies
which was created in February 1778 and
lasted until 1781 Washington was
assisted in his counter espionage
efforts by such state initiatives and by
his own agents operating behind British
lines also in this regard it should not
be forgotten that Washington's
intelligence system extended beyond the
shores of the Americas to England and
the continent thus for example when Lord
Cornwallis returned to his homeland in
the waning days of 1777 and reported
that the conquest of America was
impossible a secret agent in London
passed this information on to Benjamin
Franklin at Passy by January 20th 1778
other bits of intelligence and
counterintelligence made their way
across the Atlantic to Washington
through similar routes
with the congressional ratification of
the Articles of peace on April 15 1783
and the subsequent disbanding of the
army over the next few months
Washington's intelligence Corps went out
of existence of those spies employed by
the revolutionaries and the British only
one is thought to have reentered such
secret activities ever again footnote
this was the British agent John Howe who
settled in Canada after the Revolution
and was reactivated during the War of
1812 when he made a tour of the United
States reporting on military
preparations and popular mood his model
report was discovered by American
Historians long after his mission was
completed in footnote the vast majority
of Washington's operatives settled back
into normal business pursuits and
relative obscurity only one or two of
these individuals received any special
commendation or decoration for their
service and intelligence officers in the
armed services received only their
regular promotions nothing more the
prevailing attitude seems to have been
that the intelligence services rendered
by these individuals were necessary were
gratefully appreciated by Washington and
the nation but were not to be glorified
or publicly discussed a few Tallmadge
and Crosby among others had their
exploits captured in print but not
always in a format with any visibility
captain David gray for example published
a pamphlet on his adventures but the
last copy was destroyed in a fire at the
State Library in Albany in 1911 he had
also told his story to the Massachusetts
legislature but his petition there also
vanished however his pension claim of
1823 did survive complete with his
personal account of wartime activities
and remains with the National Archives
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you